Add documentation for Digest Step variables and Email Editor Digest Block (#827)
novuhq/docs: content/docs/platform/workflow/digest.mdx

Here, in the image below, `5` is the interval amount, and `mins` is the interval unit. Interval units can be `sec(s)`, `min(s)`, `hour(s)`, or `day(s)`.

## Digest event count variables

Events count variables provide a structured way to access, format, and display digest event data across different messaging channels in your workflow using built-in logic and formatting powered by LiquidJS filters. 

> Instead of manually writing custom logic to count events or format summary content, you can easily reference totals and relevant details directly within your notification templates to render digest summaries, such as daily digests or batch emails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of manually writing custom logic to count events or format summary content, you can reference totals and relevant details directly within your notification templates to render digest summaries, such as daily digests or batch emails.
```

Reviewer: Never use "easy" or "simple" in documentation. If you say something is easy and the user cannot do it, then that damages the trust.

Author: Yeah. True.

<Callout type="info" title="Note">These variables are automatically exposed in all variable-supporting inputs following a digest step. They are not editable, as their values are determined by the digest payload. </Callout>

### Digest variables

> Digest variables are exposed after a Digest Step has been executed and are available in all subsequent steps. These variables let you work directly with the collected events, including iterating through them or displaying a summary count.

Reviewer: Here you say "Digest Step," in the next section, "Digest step." Is there a reason to capitalize it at all? Especially considering it is not capitalized on line 166.

If you do have a good reason for capitalizing it, be consistent.

Author: Alright

So for concepts that are features in Novu and are part of their offerings, I defaulted to using initial capitalization for them, for example, Workflow, Digest, Channels, and Digest Step.

Reviewer: A feature is a distinctive attribute or capability of a product. Features are usually described in terms of what they can do as part of a product. **In general, feature names are lowercase, although there are exceptions.**

**When you write about a feature, don't capitalize it unless the name is officially capitalized.** If you're unsure, follow the precedent that's set by other documents that describe the feature. As with products, match the capitalization of a UI label if you're referring to one.

#### steps.digest-step.events

The `steps.digest-step.events` variable is an array that contains all the events collected by the Digest step. Each item in the array represents one digested event, including its payload.

You can loop through it to build dynamic message lists, such as comment summaries or blog post digests, and use it with LiquidJS filters.

```
New posts published: {{steps.digest-step.events | tosentence: payload.title}}
```

> If two events were collected, the rendered message would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If two events were collected, then the rendered message would be:
```

```
New posts published: Scaling Node.js Apps, and Designing for Accessibility
```

#### steps.digest-step.eventCount

The `steps.digest-step.eventCount` variable holds the total number of events collected during the Digest step window. It is an integer value and can be used directly or passed into LiquidJS filters like pluralize to generate grammatically correct summaries.

```
You have {{steps.digest-step.eventCount | pluralize: "new comment", "new comments"}}.

```

> If two events were collected, the rendered message would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If two events were collected, then the rendered message would be:
```

```
You have 2 new comments.
```

### Digest template variables

> Digest template variables are designed to simplify how you represent digested event data in user-facing messages. They wrap digest variables and LiquidJS filters to output preformatted summaries with minimal effort.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Digest template variables are designed to simplify how you represent digested event data in user-facing messages. They wrap digest variables and LiquidJS filters to output preformatted summaries.
```

#### steps.digest-step.countSummary

The `countSummary` variable returns a sentence fragment summarizing the total number of digested events with correct pluralization.

This variable is built on top of:
* `steps.digest-step.eventCount`
* The LiquidJS pluralize filter

Internally, `countSummary` uses the event count to apply plural logic. For example, if eventCount is 1, it outputs "1 notification", and for 3, it returns "3 notifications".

You can include it directly in an editor to render readable summaries like:

```
You have {{steps.digest-step.countSummary}} available.

```

If the Digest collected 5 events, the output would be:

```
You have 5 notifications available.
```

If only one event was collected:
```
You have 1 notification available.

```

#### steps.digest-step.sentenceSummary

The `sentenceSummary` variable returns a sentence-style string listing key items from the digested events array, such as a list of names, and gracefully handles formatting depending on the number of items present.

This variable is built on top of:
* `steps.digest-step.events`
* The LiquidJS `toSentence` filter

You can configure the `toSentence` filter by passing:

> * A key path to extract from each item (for example, payload.name)

Reviewer: Does the style guide specify hyphens or asterisks for unordered lists? I thought you were using hyphens previously. I don't have a strong preference as long as they are consistent throughout the documentation.

Author: Sticking to hyphens. I just added it to the style guide.

* The number of items to display before collapsing (for example, 3)
* The suffix to use for remaining items (for example, "others")

> Used with the `sentenceSummary` variable, this enables output like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Used with the `sentenceSummary` variable, this enables output such as:
```

```
{{steps.digest-step.sentenceSummary}} replied to your post.
```

> If the events contain names "Radek", "Dima", and 5 more users, the result would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the events contain names "Radek", "Dima", and five more users, then the result would be:
```

Author: The 5 was intentional. This is the way the feature displays the notification.

Reviewer: Yes, use it in the quoted text, leave it spelled out in the description.

```
Radek, Dima, and 5 others replied to your post.
```

If there are only two events:

```
Radek and Dima replied to your post.
```

These variable allows for dynamic personalization without writing custom iteration logic in your template.

## Email editor digest block

> The Digest Block is available in the email editor when working with workflows that include a Digest Step. It loops over the events collected by your Digest Step and displays them in your email content, handling both layout and repetition automatically.

Reviewer: More inconsistent capitalization with Digest Step.

Also, why is Digest Block capitalized?

When you add a Digest Block to your email template:
* It automatically inserts a repeat block that loops over `steps.digest-step.events`.
* Inside this loop, you define the structure once (for example, how each comment or notification looks), and it repeats for every event.
* The block also supports rendering a summary using the `steps.digest-step.eventCount` variable, typically with the pluralize LiquidJS filter.

Under the hood, the Digest Block uses a structure similar to this:

```
{% for event in steps.digest-step.events %}
  <!-- Your layout for each event goes here -->
  {{ event.payload.name }} commented: {{ event.payload.comment }}
{% endfor %}
```

You don't need to write this manually. The Email Editor handles this for you by letting you drag the Digest Block into your message and customize the content visually using the available variables.

<Callout type="info" title="Note">
The Digest Block only appears if your workflow has a preceding Digest Step. This block will not be shown in the editor without a Digest Step.

> </Callout>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
</Callout>

```

Here, in the image below, `5` is the interval amount, and `mins` is the interval unit. Interval units can be `sec(s)`, `min(s)`, `hour(s)`, or `day(s)`.

> ## Digest event count variables

Reviewer 2: I would suggest placing this section at the bottom after the `Digest strategy types`. So in the document we will have:
- Digest Engine
- Digest action step
- Digest configuration
- Digest strategy types
- Digest event count variables

Reviewer 2: I would also suggest renaming this section to something like `Consuming digested events` and rephrasing a bit about what we provide to the users so they can consume the "result" of the digest step.

Author: Alright.

Events count variables provide a structured way to access, format, and display digest event data across different messaging channels in your workflow using built-in logic and formatting powered by LiquidJS filters. 

Instead of manually writing custom logic to count events or format summary content, you can reference totals and relevant details directly within your notification templates to render digest summaries, such as daily digests or batch emails.

> <Callout type="info" title="Note">These variables are automatically exposed in all variable-supporting inputs following a digest step. They are not editable, as their values are determined by the digest payload. </Callout>

Reviewer 2: > They are not editable

Not sure if the first part is necessary.

Author: Alright.

### Digest variables

> Digest variables are exposed after a Digest Step has been executed and are available in all subsequent steps. These variables let you work directly with the collected events, including iterating through them or displaying a summary count.

Reviewer 2: > Digest variables are exposed after a Digest Step has been executed and are available in all subsequent steps.

This is a duplication of the text from the note section.

> #### steps.digest-step.events

Reviewer 2: The `digest-step` part is a dynamic part that is the digest step identifier. Usually, it's constant when you add the step, but can change if you add other digest steps and remove the previous. Maybe it could be worth mentioning that its dynamic part.

> The `steps.digest-step.events` variable is an array that contains all the events collected by the Digest step. Each item in the array represents one digested event, including its payload.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `steps.digest-step.events` variable is an array that contains all the events collected by the Digest Step. Each item in the array represents one digested event, including the payload with which the workflow was triggered.
```
or rephrase it better

You can loop through it to build dynamic message lists, such as comment summaries or blog post digests, and use it with LiquidJS filters.

```

> New posts published: {{steps.digest-step.events | tosentence: payload.title}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
New posts published: {{steps.digest-step.events | toSentence: 'payload.title', 2, 'other'}}
```

```

If two events were collected, then the rendered message would be:

```
New posts published: Scaling Node.js Apps, and Designing for Accessibility

> ```

Reviewer 2: Maybe show another example with events above the limit

Author: Alright

#### steps.digest-step.eventCount

The `steps.digest-step.eventCount` variable holds the total number of events collected during the Digest step window. It is an integer value and can be used directly or passed into LiquidJS filters like pluralize to generate grammatically correct summaries.

```

> You have {{steps.digest-step.eventCount | pluralize: "new comment", "new comments"}}.

Reviewer 2: The `new comments` argument is not required, as the value will be pluralized based on the first. It's only required when you want to pluralize languages other than English.

Author: Alright

```

If two events were collected, then the rendered message would be:

```
You have 2 new comments.

> ```

Reviewer 2: Another example with `You have 1 new comment`

### Digest template variables

Digest template variables are designed to simplify how you represent digested event data in user-facing messages. They wrap digest variables and LiquidJS filters to output preformatted summaries.

#### steps.digest-step.countSummary

The `countSummary` variable returns a sentence fragment summarizing the total number of digested events with correct pluralization.

This variable is built on top of:
* `steps.digest-step.eventCount`
* The LiquidJS pluralize filter

Internally, `countSummary` uses the event count to apply plural logic. For example, if eventCount is 1, it outputs "1 notification", and for 3, it returns "3 notifications".

You can include it directly in an editor to render readable summaries like:

```
You have {{steps.digest-step.countSummary}} available.

> ```

Reviewer 2: This is not correct, you cannot do that in the editor, you can only pick it from the variables dropdown, which will insert the variable like this:
```
{{steps.digest-step.eventCount | pluralize: 'notification', 'notifications'}}
```

Author: So it will be something like this?
```
You have {{steps.digest-step.eventCount | pluralize: 'notifications'}} available.
```

Reviewer 2: It will be:
```
You have {{steps.digest-step.eventCount | pluralize: 'notification'}} available.
```
Because the first argument to the `pluralize` filter is the `singular` word form.

If the Digest collected 5 events, the output would be:

```
You have 5 notifications available.
```

If only one event was collected:
```
You have 1 notification available.

```

#### steps.digest-step.sentenceSummary

The `sentenceSummary` variable returns a sentence-style string listing key items from the digested events array, such as a list of names, and gracefully handles formatting depending on the number of items present.

This variable is built on top of:
* `steps.digest-step.events`
* The LiquidJS `toSentence` filter

You can configure the `toSentence` filter by passing:

> * A key path to extract from each item (for example, payload.name)

Reviewer 2: Worth mentioning that it's required argument

* The number of items to display before collapsing (for example, 3)
* The suffix to use for remaining items (for example, "others")

Used with the `sentenceSummary` variable, this enables output such as:

```
{{steps.digest-step.sentenceSummary}} replied to your post.

> ```

Reviewer 2: Same thing only available from the variables dropdown and inserts this:
```
{{steps.digest-step.events | toSentence: 'payload.name', 2, 'other'}}
```

Author: Alright

If the events contain names "Radek", "Dima", and 5 more users, the result would be:

```
Radek, Dima, and 5 others replied to your post.
```

If there are only two events:

```
Radek and Dima replied to your post.
```

These variable allows for dynamic personalization without writing custom iteration logic in your template.

## Email editor digest block

The Digest Block is available in the email editor when working with workflows that include a Digest Step. It loops over the events collected by your Digest Step and displays them in your email content, handling both layout and repetition automatically.

When you add a Digest Block to your email template:

> * It automatically inserts a repeat block that loops over `steps.digest-step.events`.

Reviewer 2: With max items for iteration defaulted to 5

* Inside this loop, you define the structure once (for example, how each comment or notification looks), and it repeats for every event.
* The block also supports rendering a summary using the `steps.digest-step.eventCount` variable, typically with the pluralize LiquidJS filter.

Under the hood, the Digest Block uses a structure similar to this:

```

> {% for event in steps.digest-step.events %}
>   <!-- Your layout for each event goes here -->
>   {{ event.payload.name }} commented: {{ event.payload.comment }}
> {% endfor %}

Reviewer 2: There is not LiquidJS syntax alternative to the repeat block, but it's a for that iterates over max 5 items (default)
```suggestion
{% for current in steps.digest-step.events, max = 5 %}
  <!-- Your layout for each event goes here -->
  - Hello {{ current.payload.name }}
{% endfor %}
{{steps.digest-step.eventCount | minus: 5 | pluralize: 'more comment', ''}}
```
This is not a valid LiquidJS code.

Author: What would be the valid LiquidJS code?

Reviewer 2: Ahh ok there is valid LiquidJS syntax:
```
{% for current in steps.digest-step.events limit:5 %}
  <!-- Your layout for each event goes here -->
  - Hello {{ current.payload.name }}
{% endfor %}
{{steps.digest-step.eventCount | minus: 5 | pluralize: 'more comment', ''}}
```

```

You don't need to write this manually. The Email Editor handles this for you by letting you drag the Digest Block into your message and customize the content visually using the available variables.

<Callout type="info" title="Note">
The Digest Block only appears if your workflow has a preceding Digest Step. This block will not be shown in the editor without a Digest Step.
</Callout>

> 

Reviewer 2: It's worth also mentioning somewhere that we have the alias variable `current` that could be only used inside the repeat block to access the currently iterated item, for example `current.payload.name`

Author: Alright. This wasn’t captured in the documentation checklist.

> Here, in the image below, `5` is the interval amount, and `mins` is the interval unit. Interval units can be `sec(s)`, `min(s)`, `hour(s)`, or `day(s)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the image below, `5` is the interval amount, and `mins` is the interval unit. Interval units can be `sec(s)`, `min(s)`, `hour(s)`, or `day(s)`.
```

## Digest strategy types

> The strategy which Novu should use to handle the Digest step. More details on available strategies below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The strategy which Novu should use to handle the digest step. More details on available strategies below.
```

> Novu allows you to define different digest strategies depending on the actual use-case you are trying to achieve. At this point we allow you to select from 2 strategies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Novu allows you to define different digest strategies depending on the actual use case you are trying to achieve. At this point we allow you to select from two strategies:
```

#### steps.digest-step.events

The `steps.digest-step.events` variable is an array that contains all the events collected by the digest step. Each item in the array represents a digested event, including the payload with which the workflow was triggered.

You can loop through it to build dynamic message lists, such as comment summaries or blog post digests, and use it with LiquidJS filters.

```
New posts published: {{steps.digest-step.events | toSentence:'payload.title', 2, 'more'}}
```

If two events were collected, the rendered message would be:

```
New posts published: Scaling Node.js Apps, and Designing for Accessibility
```

If three or more events were collected, the rendered message would be:

```
New posts published: Scaling Node.js Apps, and Designing for Accessibility, and more.
```

#### steps.digest-step.eventCount

The `steps.digest-step.eventCount` variable holds the total number of events collected during the digest step window. It is an integer value and can be used directly or passed into LiquidJS filters like pluralize to generate grammatically correct summaries.

```
You have {{steps.digest-step.eventCount | pluralize: "new comment"}}.
```

> If one event was collected, the rendered message would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If one event was collected, then the rendered message would be:
```

Reviewer: Per the editing checklist, always include a "then" when the sentence starts with "if." This is a useful signpost for non-native English speakers.

```
You have 1 new comment.
```

> If two events were collected, the rendered message would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If two events were collected, then the rendered message would be:
```

```
You have 2 new comments.
```

### Digest template variables

Digest template variables are designed to simplify how you represent digested event data in user-facing messages. They wrap digest variables and LiquidJS filters to output preformatted summaries with minimal effort.

#### steps.digest-step.countSummary

The `countSummary` variable returns a sentence fragment summarizing the total number of digested events with correct pluralization.

This variable is built on top of:
- `steps.digest-step.eventCount`
- The LiquidJS pluralize filter

> Internally, `countSummary` uses the event count to apply plural logic. To use `countSummary` in the editor, select it from the variables dropdown. This will automatically insert the variable like this:

Reviewer: Is it a variables list or a variables menu? From the Google developer documentation style guide:

<img width="860" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/77a41b8a-48eb-4214-8909-c3afa51d9285" />

```
You have {{steps.digest-step.eventCount | pluralize: 'notification'}}
```

> For example, if the digest collected five events, the output would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if the digest collected five events, then the output would be:
```

```
You have 5 notifications
```

If only one event was collected:

```
you have 1 notification
```

#### steps.digest-step.sentenceSummary

The `sentenceSummary` variable returns a sentence-style string listing key items from the digested events array, such as a list of names, and gracefully handles formatting depending on the number of items present.

This variable is built on top of:
- `steps.digest-step.events`
- The LiquidJS `toSentence` filter

You can configure the `toSentence` filter by passing:
- A key path to extract from each item (for example, `payload.name`). This is a required argument.
- The number of items to display before collapsing (for example, 3)
- The suffix to use for remaining items (for example, "others")

> Internally, `sentenceSummary` uses the events array to generate the sentence. To use `sentenceSummary` in the editor, select it from the variables dropdown. This will automatically insert the variable like this:

Reviewer: Same issue with "dropdown" here. Update throughout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internally, `sentenceSummary` uses the events array to generate the sentence. To use `sentenceSummary` in the editor, select it from the variables dropdown. This automatically inserts the variable as shown:
```
